Management

Atlantic cod fisheries are managed by ministries, departments, commissions, and
councils that represent the coastal countries and states involved in the
fisheries. General management objectives include the conservation of fish stocks
and protecting the marine environment, while optimizing the long-term economic
and social benefits of the fisheries. A key instrument in fisheries management
is the restriction of the amount of fishing that takes place within each year,
usually by limiting the total allowable catch in tonnes or sometimes by limiting
the number of fishing days in the year.

Limit reference points have been defined that indicate the minimum spawning
stock size to ensure sustainable levels of recruitment for a given stock.
Precautionary reference points are sometimes also defined, slightly above the
limit reference points, to take into account the imperfect information and
statistical uncertainty about the estimated current stock size. Target reference
points may also be defined, although they often refer to an optimal constant
fishing pressure, rather than the stock size that is subject to natural
fluctuations.

In general, the scientific advice is to apply an optimal fishing pressure, but
to reduce the fishing pressure when the stock is below a precautionary reference
point, and to reduce fishing to a minimum if the stock falls below the limit
reference point. A common definition of an overfished stock is when the spawning
stock biomass is below the limit or precautionary reference point.

Three out of the 17 cod stocks compared in this chapter are in a healthy state,
above the precautionary reference points, all found in the Northeast Atlantic.
They are the Northeast Arctic cod, the Icelandic cod, and the Western Greenland
inshore cod (Table 3). The other 14 are all below the reference point defining
them as overfished and the scientific advice is either zero catch or rebuilding
the stock with reduced fishing pressure.

The Eastern Baltic cod is a special case where the scientific advice has a
special emphasis on the degradation of ecosystem status, resulting from
cumulative anthropogenic pressures and climate change. The recommendation is
habitat restoration efforts, with a focus on reducing eutrophication to improve
bottom oxygen content. Low growth, poor condition, and high natural mortality of
Eastern Baltic cod is linked to poor oxygen status, reduced availability of fish
prey, and high levels of parasite infections (ICES 2023).

A positive sign of a stock recovery comes from the Northern cod stock, where
after a moratorium of three decades the spawning stock size is currently
estimated around 400 thousand tonnes (DFO 2022). A severely overfished cod stock
can take decades to rebuild and can also be affected by major restructuring of
marine food webs and fisheries (Frank et al. 2011).
